---
categories: ["Engineering"]
date: "2017-03-14T00:00:00+05:30"
description: ""
draft: false
slug: "writing-kickass-readmes"
title: "Writing Kickass READMEs"
---

Writing documentation for code is **extremely** important. Alas! I realized this
late. Nevertheless, you should not make this mistake again.

This is written with respect to software related READMEs, if you want guidelines
for other stuff, then probably this isn’t the right place.

Let’s discuss the potential problems of not having a good README:

### Not a clear description of the project

I don’t recount how many times this has happened with me. I usually just scroll
through all of my friends’ projects on GitHub to see what they are upto these
days and time and again I have been disappointed by not seeing a good
description about the project and it is too time consuming to read the whole
source code to find out what that repository is actually doing.

In fact some professional projects too have vague description and you are left
clueless as to what the code does. Sometimes the project is so big that they
can’t really mention all of it in one thing. That is the time you should
probably split it in many repositories or folders (if you desperately want a big
mono repo like Google) and each folder should contain some high-level
information of what the code inside it will do, just like recursive `Makefiles`.

### Not having a installation guide (or an incomplete one)

So since you have got the viewer interested in trying our your software by
writing a good introduction, you would now probably piss off her by sucking at
writing an installation guide.

What a developer should understand is that since your development environment is
setup to run that code, doesn’t mean everybody’s is. One should always write the
whole installation process for all systems that the software supports and it
should clearly mention that the software doesn’t really have support for this
system but it would be great to support it in future or something.

For unix-based systems, one should list out all the ways to install the
software. Let’s take an example of Ubuntu. If you have managed to get your
software packaged with a `.deb` file and also uploaded it upstream so that it
can be used with `apt-get`, then that’s just awesome!

Sometimes you might be releasing it and then packing the source code in a
`tar.gz` format, still awesome. In the latter case, it would be worth while to
mention all of the dependencies required. Also, just the name isn’t enough,
their exact version numbers is even better because you might never know when a
python code breaks because of the version bump because well that’s how things
work in python world.

If you are expecting the user to do a `gcc` based compiling for each source code
file then God just forgive you. It is time to move on to at least `Makefiles` to
automate that process for you.

If something doesn’t work in particular systems, it is **important** to list it
out.

### No User Documentation

You don’t have a user documentation? Well then how do you expect others to use
your software. User documentation should be in another file or folder (if it is
quite big) and should probably be in some kind of a format which can be rendered
easily. You can either write it in markdown format or in Github wiki’s so that
it can be easily read on GitHub or you can write in `man` pages form for the
oldies to read it. But you should have it. And that’s not it, your README should
explicitly point out to the documentation and also tell the user how to access
it and actually read it.

Also you can include the very basic use case in the README itself.

### No guide for people to actually contribute

If you have the viewer till now and she is thinking of actually contributing to
your project, then kudos, your project is **awesome**.

A very important part of the contributing guide is to setup the development
environment. Again in this, it is worthwhile to get into the platform specific
information. For eg. Windows will have different development environment while
Ubuntu will have a different one. You should mention what IDE you used or the
tools that you used.

Now your project might have some development related dependencies. You should
mention about that too. Now finally the viewer can have successful environment
setup to actually contribute to your code.

Now, you might be following some conventions for writing your code, right? It is
worth while to mention the conventions that you have followed in a separate file
and link it in the README.

Then you would have a specific way or two in which you accept others’ code,
right? You might be using Github’s Pull Request based system or the age old
sending patches via email using `git-format-patch` and `git-send-email` just
like old times. Whichever you prefer, it is important to specify this in a new
file possibly named as `CONTRIBUTING GUIDELINES` or something. If you have any
specifics about the project **mention** it there. Don’t just expect people to
know it by default.

It is also worth while to link the `easy to fix` bugs for new comers so that
they can get familiar with the code base without trying to mingle with the core
parts of the software.

### No technical documentation

If you are having a big project, then you might be having a “core” part which is
used by other parts of code. Have you documented it? Or you just expect people
to `git-grep` and `git-blame` to find the relevant use cases, definition of the
functions and the documentation inside the commit messages? If you are doing
that, it is not exactly bad (I understand you might be having your own reasons)
but it is good to write a technical documentation wherein you will tell the
programmer what a method does and how to use it. This will also make sure she
doesn’t write a method to do the same stuff again and thus it would reduce your
redundancy.

### No mention of how to run tests

Of course you project has tests, otherwise how can you make sure that by writing
new code, you don’t break the old code? Your README should contain how to run
the test suite. There are tons of different test suites available in the market
and it is time consuming for people to check out your test framework and make
guesses as how one could probably run it. You should mention how to run
individual tests, the whole test suite, and how to skip some tests, and if your
test suite framework doesn’t support all of these features, then maybe the one
you are using should be replaced.

### No license

Yes, legal matters are important too! Whether you are releasing it as an truly
open-sourced software with `BSD` license or something else, you should mention
it. If you don’t realize the importance of licensing, that is maybe because your
project isn’t big enough. Once a lot of people read your code, use it, they
might try to finger with it whether you like it or not. You should explicitly
specify “how much fingering” you can tolerate in a separate file named as
`LICENCE` in full detail like a legal document and if you are using a popular
license, you can just mention the name in the README.

### No place to mention about bugs

You don’t have a bug management system? Okay, I agree this isn’t really always
required but if you do, you should explicitly mention and link to that. If you
talk about bugs in GitHub issues, then mention it there. Also if you are using
GitHub, use labels to specify the bugs. If you still track bugs using emails via
mailing list, specify that too also include a link to the old archives of the
mailing list.

### No mention about the version control system

Well if you are seeing the project on Github, is it wrong to assume that it uses
`git`? Yes, there are many projects that I know use multiple version control
systems and the best example is `nmap`. They accept patches (and PRs) in all
forms and integrate it together. So explicitly mention about all the version
control systems that you would be using and how you would accept foreign code
for each.

### No contacts

How should the viewer contact you in case he needs something or has something
for you? Probably now you have a good incentive to give out your contact
information (mainly email is good) for others to contact you or just say “Thanks
for the awesome software!”.

### No fancy GUI pictures

You probably would have spent a hell lot of time in designing and tweaking the
GUI and were frustrated when a font size looks bigger than it should, so you
should show it off. There are lots of people who like the fancy GUI way of
software rather than the good old black terminal with green text. If you have a
fancy GUI, try and put the pictures of it in the README. GitHub’s markdown
renders it, but I don’t think `man` pages do. But if you **really** care about
man pages, you probably won’t even have cared enough to make a fancy GUI.

### No table of contents

Well if you try to write everything that I have pointed out, then it is probably
good for you to follow this advice too. Have a `Table of Contents`. This way,
the README will look more organized and it would make reading much easier.

Okay, now that I have ranted a lot, I hope you know **How to Write KickAss
READMEs**.

*****

*This [article](http://www.bauva.com/blog/Writing-Kickass-READMEs/) originally
appeared in Pranit Bauva’s [website](http://www.bauva.com/).*
